safe-gpkg.md, before:

# Safe GeoPackage Tiles

### Introduction

This file will eventually be a complementary specification to the GeoPackage Tiles
Specification, that has the triggers and table creation SQL to create a GeoPackage
that will maintain its consistency.

For the immediate term, however, it will just be a spot for the big long SQL blocks
in the specification to live, so they don't clutter it up.

## Trigger language from main spec

A `tile_matrix_metadata` row record SHALL be inserted 
for a zoom level for `t_table_name` before any tiles are inserted into the corresponding tiles 
table, so that triggers on that table specified in clause 10.5 below may reference `tile_matrix_metadata` 
column values for that zoom level to reject invalid data.

## SQL Tables

### 1.0 raster_columns SQL

The `raster_columns` table or view in a GeoPackage SHALL have the triggers defined in *Table 1.1* below.

**Table 1.1** - `raster_columns` Trigger Definition SQL

```SQL
CREATE TRIGGER 'raster_columns_r_raster_column_insert'
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'raster_columns'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK,'insert on raster_columns violates constraint: r_raster_column value must not contain a single quote')
        WHERE NEW.r_raster_column LIKE ('%''%');
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK,'insert on raster_columns violates constraint: r_raster_column value must not contain a double quote')
        WHERE NEW.r_raster_column LIKE ('%"%');
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK,'insert on raster_columns violates constraint: r_raster_column value must be lower case')
        WHERE NEW.r_raster_column <> lower(NEW.r_raster_column);
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'raster_columns_r_raster_column_update' 
  BEFORE UPDATE OF r_raster_column ON 'raster_columns'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK,'update on raster_columns violates constraint: r_raster_column value must not contain a single quote')
        WHERE NEW.r_raster_column LIKE ('%''%');
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK,'update on raster_columns violates constraint: r_raster_column value must not contain a double quote')
        WHERE NEW.r_raster_column LIKE ('%"%');
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK,'update on raster_columns violates constraint: r_raster_column value must be lower case')
        WHERE NEW.r_raster_column <> lower(NEW.r_raster_column);
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'raster_columns_georectification_insert'
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'raster_columns'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''raster_columns'' violates constraint: georectification must be -1, 0, 1 or 2')
        WHERE (NOT (NEW.georectification IN (-1, 0, 1, 2)));
    END 

CREATE TRIGGER 'raster_columns_georectification_update'
  BEFORE UPDATE OF georectification ON 'raster_columns'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''raster_columns'' violates constraint: georectification must be -1, 0, 1 or 2')
        WHERE (NOT (NEW.georectification IN (-1, 0, 1, 2)));
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'raster_columns_compr_qual_factor_insert' 
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'raster_columns'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''raster_columns'' violates constraint: compr_qual_factor < 1, must be -1 or between 1 and 100')
        WHERE NEW.compr_qual_factor < -1;
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''raster_columns'' violates constraint: compr_qual_factor = 0, must be -1 or between 1 and 100')
        WHERE NEW.compr_qual_factor = 0;
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''raster_columns'' violates constraint: compr_qual_factor > 100, must be -1 or between 1 and 100')
        WHERE NEW.compr_qual_factor > 100;
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'raster_columns_compr_qual_factor_update' 
  BEFORE UPDATE OF compr_qual_factor ON 'raster_columns'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''raster_columns'' violates constraint: compr_qual_factor < 1, must be -1 or between 1 and 100')
        WHERE NEW.compr_qual_factor < -1;
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''raster_columns'' violates constraint: compr_qual_factor = 0, must be -1 or between 1 and 100')
        WHERE NEW.compr_qual_factor = 0;
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''raster_columns'' violates constraint: compr_qual_factor > 100, must be -1 or between 1 and 100')
        WHERE NEW.compr_qual_factor > 100;
    END
```

**Table 1.2** - EXAMPLE: `raster_columns` INSERT Statement

```SQL
INSERT INTO raster_columns VALUES ("sample_matrix_tiles", "tile_data", 90, 2, 4326)
```

-
### 2.0 tile_table_metadata SQL

**Table 2.1** - `tile_table_metadata` Trigger Definition SQL

```SQL
CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_table_metadata_t_table_name_insert' 
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'tile_table_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''tile_table_metadata'' violates constraint: t_table_name not in raster_columns.r_table_name values')
        WHERE NOT (NEW.t_table_name IN (SELECT DISTINCT r_table_name FROM raster_columns));
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_table_metadata_t_table_name_update' 
  BEFORE UPDATE OF t_table_name ON 'tile_table_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''tile_table_metadata'' violates constraint: t_table_name not in raster_columns.r_table_name values')
        WHERE NOT (NEW.t_table_name IN (SELECT DISTINCT r_table_name FROM raster_columns));
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_table_metadata_is_times_two_zoom_insert' 
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'tile_table_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on tile_table_metadata violates constraint: is_time_two_zoom must be one of 0|1')
        WHERE NOT(NEW.is_times_two_zoom IN (0,1));
    END
  
CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_table_metadata_is_times_two_zoom_update' 
  BEFORE UPDATE OF is_times_two_zoom ON 'tile_table_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update of tile_table_metadata violates constraint: is_time_two_zoom must be one of 0|1')
        WHERE NOT(NEW.is_times_two_zoom IN (0,1));
    END
```

**Table 2.2** - EXAMPLE: `tile_table_metadata` Insert Statement

```SQL
INSERT INTO tile_table_metadata VALUES ("sample_matrix_tiles", 1);
```

-
### 3.0 tile_matrix_metadata SQL

**Table 3.1** - `tile_matrix_metadata` Trigger Definition SQL

```SQL
CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_matrix_metadata_zoom_level_insert'
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'tile_matrix_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''tile_matrix_metadata'' violates constraint: zoom_level cannot be less than 0')
        WHERE (NEW.zoom_level < 0);
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_matrix_metadata_zoom_level_update'
  BEFORE UPDATE of zoom_level ON 'tile_matrix_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''tile_matrix_metadata'' violates constraint: zoom_level cannot be less than 0')
        WHERE (NEW.zoom_level < 0);
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_matrix_metadata_matrix_width_insert'
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'tile_matrix_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''tile_matrix_metadata'' violates constraint: matrix_width cannot be less than 1')
        WHERE (NEW.matrix_width < 1);
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_matrix_metadata_matrix_width_update'
  BEFORE UPDATE OF matrix_width ON 'tile_matrix_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''tile_matrix_metadata'' violates constraint: matrix_width cannot be less than 1')
        WHERE (NEW.matrix_width < 1);
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_matrix_metadata_matrix_height_insert'
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'tile_matrix_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''tile_matrix_metadata'' violates constraint: matrix_height cannot be less than 1')
        WHERE (NEW.matrix_height < 1);
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_matrix_metadata_matrix_height_update'
  BEFORE UPDATE OF matrix_height ON 'tile_matrix_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''tile_matrix_metadata'' violates constraint: matrix_height cannot be less than 1')
        WHERE (NEW.matrix_height < 1);
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_matrix_metadata_pixel_x_size_insert'
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'tile_matrix_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''tile_matrix_metadata'' violates constraint: pixel_x_size must be greater than 0')
        WHERE NOT (NEW.pixel_x_size > 0);
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_matrix_metadata_pixel_x_size_update'
  BEFORE UPDATE OF pixel_x_size ON 'tile_matrix_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''tile_matrix_metadata'' violates constraint: pixel_x_size must be greater than 0')
        WHERE NOT (NEW.pixel_x_size > 0);
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_matrix_metadata_pixel_y_size_insert'
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'tile_matrix_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''tile_matrix_metadata'' violates constraint: pixel_y_size must be greater than 0')
        WHERE NOT (NEW.pixel_y_size > 0);
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_matrix_metadata_pixel_y_size_update'
  BEFORE UPDATE OF pixel_y_size ON 'tile_matrix_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''tile_matrix_metadata'' violates constraint: pixel_y_size must be greater than 0')
        WHERE NOT (NEW.pixel_y_size > 0);
    END
```

**Table 3.2** - EXAMPLE: `tile_matrix_metadata` Insert Statement

```SQL
INSERT INTO tile_matrix_metadata VALUES ("sample_matrix_tiles", 0, 1, 1, 512, 512, 2.0, 2.0)
```

-
### 4.0 sample_matrix_tiles SQL

**Table 4.1** – EXAMPLE: `sample_matrix_tiles` Trigger Definition SQL

```SQL
SELECT add_tile_triggers(‘sample_matrix_tiles’)
/* creates the following triggers */

CREATE TRIGGER "sample_matrix_tiles_zoom_insert"
  BEFORE INSERT ON "sample_matrix_tiles"
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''sample_matrix_tiles'' violates constraint: zoom_level not specified for table in tile_matrix_metadata')
        WHERE NOT (NEW.zoom_level IN (SELECT zoom_level FROM tile_matrix_metadata WHERE t_table_name = 'sample_matrix_tiles')) ;
    END

CREATE TRIGGER "sample_matrix_tiles_zoom_update"
  BEFORE UPDATE OF zoom_level ON "sample_matrix_tiles"
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''sample_matrix_tiles'' violates constraint: zoom_level not specified for table in tile_matrix_metadata')
        WHERE NOT (NEW.zoom_level IN (SELECT zoom_level FROM tile_matrix_metadata WHERE t_table_name = 'sample_matrix_tiles')) ;
    END

CREATE TRIGGER "sample_matrix_tiles_tile_column_insert"
  BEFORE INSERT ON "sample_matrix_tiles"
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''sample_matrix_tiles'' violates constraint: tile_column cannot be < 0')
        WHERE (NEW.tile_column < 0) ;
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''sample_matrix_tiles'' violates constraint: tile_column must by < matrix_width specified for table and zoom level in tile_matrix_metadata')
        WHERE NOT (NEW.tile_column < (SELECT matrix_width FROM tile_matrix_metadata WHERE t_table_name = 'sample_matrix_tiles' AND zoom_level = NEW.zoom_level));
    END

CREATE TRIGGER "sample_matrix_tiles_tile_column_update"
  BEFORE UPDATE OF tile_column ON "sample_matrix_tiles"
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''sample_matrix_tiles'' violates constraint: tile_column cannot be < 0')
        WHERE (NEW.tile_column < 0) ;
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''sample_matrix_tiles'' violates constraint: tile_column must by < matrix_width specified for table and zoom level in tile_matrix_metadata')
        WHERE NOT (NEW.tile_column < (SELECT matrix_width FROM tile_matrix_metadata WHERE t_table_name = 'sample_matrix_tiles' AND zoom_level = NEW.zoom_level));
    END

CREATE TRIGGER "sample_matrix_tiles_tile_row_insert"
  BEFORE INSERT ON "sample_matrix_tiles"
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''sample_matrix_tiles'' violates constraint: tile_row cannot be < 0')
        WHERE (NEW.tile_row < 0) ;
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''sample_matrix_tiles'' violates constraint: tile_row must by < matrix_height specified for table and zoom level in tile_matrix_metadata')
        WHERE NOT (NEW.tile_row < (SELECT matrix_height FROM tile_matrix_metadata WHERE t_table_name = 'sample_matrix_tiles' AND zoom_level = NEW.zoom_level));
    END

CREATE TRIGGER "sample_matrix_tiles_tile_row_update"
  BEFORE UPDATE OF tile_row ON "sample_matrix_tiles"
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''sample_matrix_tiles'' violates constraint: tile_row cannot be < 0')
        WHERE (NEW.tile_row < 0) ;
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''sample_matrix_tiles'' violates constraint: tile_row must by < matrix_height specified for table and zoom level in tile_matrix_metadata')
        WHERE NOT (NEW.tile_row < (SELECT matrix_height FROM tile_matrix_metadata WHERE t_table_name = 'sample_matrix_tiles' AND zoom_level = NEW.zoom_level));
    END
```
 
**Table 4.2** - EXAMPLE:  `sample_matrix_tiles` Insert Statement

```SQL
INSERT INTO sample_matrix_tiles VALUES (1, 1, 1, 1, "BLOB VALUE")
```
-
### 5.0 sample_rasters SQL

**Table 5.1** - EXAMPLE: `sample_rasters` Insert Statement

```SQL
INSERT INTO sample_rasters VALUES (1, {Elevation Raster}, 'rough terrain', {Area Photo} )
```

-
### 6.0 {RasterLayerName}_rt_metadata SQL

**Table 6.1** - EXAMPLE: `{RasterLayerName}_rt_metadata` Trigger Definition SQL

```SQL
SELECT add_rt_metadata_triggers('sample_rasters')
/* creates the following triggers */

CREATE TRIGGER 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata_r_raster_column_insert'
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''sample_rasters_rt_metadata'' violates constraint: r_raster_column must be specified for table sample_rasters in table raster_columns')
        WHERE (NOT (NEW.r_raster_column IN (SELECT DISTINCT r_raster_column FROM raster_columns WHERE r_table_name = 'sample_rasters')));
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata_r_raster_column_update'
  BEFORE UPDATE OF r_raster_column ON 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''sample_rasters_rt_metadata'' violates constraint: r_raster_column must be specified for table sample_rasters in table raster_columns')
        WHERE (NOT (NEW.r_raster_column IN (SELECT DISTINCT r_raster_column FROM raster_columns WHERE r_table_name = 'sample_rasters')));
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata_georectification_insert'
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''sample_rasters_rt_metadata'' violates constraint: georectification must be -1, 0, 1 or 2')
        WHERE (NOT (NEW.georectification IN (-1, 0, 1, 2)));
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata_georectification_update'
  BEFORE UPDATE OF georectification ON 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''sample_rasters_rt_metadata'' violates constraint: georectification must be -1, 0, 1 or 2')
        WHERE (NOT (NEW.georectification IN (-1, 0, 1, 2)));
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata_compr_qual_factor_insert' 
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''sample_rasters_rt_metadata'' violates constraint: compr_qual_factor < -1, must -1 or be between 1 and 100')
        WHERE NEW.compr_qual_factor < -1;
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''sample_rasters_rt_metadata'' violates constraint: compr_qual_factor = 0, must -1 or be between 1 and 100')
        WHERE NEW.compr_qual_factor = 0;
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''sample_rasters_rt_metadata'' violates constraint: compr_qual_factor > 100, must be -1 or between 1 and 100')
        WHERE NEW.compr_qual_factor > 100;
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata_compr_qual_factor_update' 
  BEFORE UPDATE OF compr_qual_factor ON 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''sample_rasters_rt_metadata'' violates constraint: compr_qual_factor < -1, must be -1 or between 1 and 100')
        WHERE NEW.compr_qual_factor < -1;
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''sample_rasters_rt_metadata'' violates constraint: compr_qual_factor = 0, must be -1 or between 1 and 100')
        WHERE NEW.compr_qual_factor = 0;
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''sample_rasters_rt_metadata'' violates constraint: compr_qual_factor > 100, must be -1 or between 1 and 100')
        WHERE NEW.compr_qual_factor > 100;
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata_row_id_value_insert' 
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table sample_rasters_rt_metadata violates constraint: row_id_value must exist in sample_rasters table')
        WHERE NOT EXISTS (SELECT rowid FROM 'sample_rasters' WHERE rowid = NEW.row_id_value);
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata_row_id_value_update' 
  BEFORE UPDATE OF 'row_id_value' ON 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table sample_rasters_rt_metadata violates constraint: row_id_value must exist in sample_rasters table')
        WHERE NOT EXISTS (SELECT rowid FROM 'sample_rasters' WHERE rowid = NEW.row_id_value);
    END
```

**Table 6.3** - EXAMPLE: `{RasterLayerName}_rt_metadata` Insert Statement

```SQL
INSERT INTO sample_matrix_tiles_rt_metadata VALUES (1, "tile_data", 1, -77.0, 38.0, -75.0, 40.0, 100,)
```

Commit message:

moved triggers sentences about tiles to safe geopackage

safe-gpkg.md, after:

# Safe GeoPackage Tiles

### Introduction

This file will eventually be a complementary specification to the GeoPackage Tiles
Specification, that has the triggers and table creation SQL to create a GeoPackage
that will maintain its consistency.

For the immediate term, however, it will just be a spot for the big long SQL blocks
in the specification to live, so they don't clutter it up.

## Trigger language from main spec

A `tile_matrix_metadata` row record SHALL be inserted 
for a zoom level for `t_table_name` before any tiles are inserted into the corresponding tiles 
table, so that triggers on that table specified in clause 10.5 below may reference `tile_matrix_metadata` 
column values for that zoom level to reject invalid data.

GeoPackages SHALL implement appropriate SQL triggers on each tiles table by executing the 
`add_tile_triggers()` routine specified in clause 10.8 below with the tiles table as a parameter 
value to ensure that 

1.	The `zoom_level` value is specified for the tiles table in the `tile_matrix_metadata` table

2.	The tile column value is between 0 and the `matrix_height` specified for the zoom_level in the `tile_matrix_metadata` table

3.	The `tile_row value is between 0 and the `matrix_width` specified for the `zoom_level` in the `tile_matrix_metadata` table


## SQL Tables

### 1.0 raster_columns SQL

The `raster_columns` table or view in a GeoPackage SHALL have the triggers defined in *Table 1.1* below.

**Table 1.1** - `raster_columns` Trigger Definition SQL

```SQL
CREATE TRIGGER 'raster_columns_r_raster_column_insert'
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'raster_columns'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK,'insert on raster_columns violates constraint: r_raster_column value must not contain a single quote')
        WHERE NEW.r_raster_column LIKE ('%''%');
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK,'insert on raster_columns violates constraint: r_raster_column value must not contain a double quote')
        WHERE NEW.r_raster_column LIKE ('%"%');
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK,'insert on raster_columns violates constraint: r_raster_column value must be lower case')
        WHERE NEW.r_raster_column <> lower(NEW.r_raster_column);
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'raster_columns_r_raster_column_update' 
  BEFORE UPDATE OF r_raster_column ON 'raster_columns'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK,'update on raster_columns violates constraint: r_raster_column value must not contain a single quote')
        WHERE NEW.r_raster_column LIKE ('%''%');
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK,'update on raster_columns violates constraint: r_raster_column value must not contain a double quote')
        WHERE NEW.r_raster_column LIKE ('%"%');
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK,'update on raster_columns violates constraint: r_raster_column value must be lower case')
        WHERE NEW.r_raster_column <> lower(NEW.r_raster_column);
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'raster_columns_georectification_insert'
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'raster_columns'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''raster_columns'' violates constraint: georectification must be -1, 0, 1 or 2')
        WHERE (NOT (NEW.georectification IN (-1, 0, 1, 2)));
    END 

CREATE TRIGGER 'raster_columns_georectification_update'
  BEFORE UPDATE OF georectification ON 'raster_columns'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''raster_columns'' violates constraint: georectification must be -1, 0, 1 or 2')
        WHERE (NOT (NEW.georectification IN (-1, 0, 1, 2)));
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'raster_columns_compr_qual_factor_insert' 
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'raster_columns'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''raster_columns'' violates constraint: compr_qual_factor < 1, must be -1 or between 1 and 100')
        WHERE NEW.compr_qual_factor < -1;
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''raster_columns'' violates constraint: compr_qual_factor = 0, must be -1 or between 1 and 100')
        WHERE NEW.compr_qual_factor = 0;
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''raster_columns'' violates constraint: compr_qual_factor > 100, must be -1 or between 1 and 100')
        WHERE NEW.compr_qual_factor > 100;
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'raster_columns_compr_qual_factor_update' 
  BEFORE UPDATE OF compr_qual_factor ON 'raster_columns'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''raster_columns'' violates constraint: compr_qual_factor < 1, must be -1 or between 1 and 100')
        WHERE NEW.compr_qual_factor < -1;
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''raster_columns'' violates constraint: compr_qual_factor = 0, must be -1 or between 1 and 100')
        WHERE NEW.compr_qual_factor = 0;
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''raster_columns'' violates constraint: compr_qual_factor > 100, must be -1 or between 1 and 100')
        WHERE NEW.compr_qual_factor > 100;
    END
```

**Table 1.2** - EXAMPLE: `raster_columns` INSERT Statement

```SQL
INSERT INTO raster_columns VALUES ("sample_matrix_tiles", "tile_data", 90, 2, 4326)
```

-
### 2.0 tile_table_metadata SQL

**Table 2.1** - `tile_table_metadata` Trigger Definition SQL

```SQL
CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_table_metadata_t_table_name_insert' 
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'tile_table_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''tile_table_metadata'' violates constraint: t_table_name not in raster_columns.r_table_name values')
        WHERE NOT (NEW.t_table_name IN (SELECT DISTINCT r_table_name FROM raster_columns));
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_table_metadata_t_table_name_update' 
  BEFORE UPDATE OF t_table_name ON 'tile_table_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''tile_table_metadata'' violates constraint: t_table_name not in raster_columns.r_table_name values')
        WHERE NOT (NEW.t_table_name IN (SELECT DISTINCT r_table_name FROM raster_columns));
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_table_metadata_is_times_two_zoom_insert' 
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'tile_table_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on tile_table_metadata violates constraint: is_time_two_zoom must be one of 0|1')
        WHERE NOT(NEW.is_times_two_zoom IN (0,1));
    END
  
CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_table_metadata_is_times_two_zoom_update' 
  BEFORE UPDATE OF is_times_two_zoom ON 'tile_table_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update of tile_table_metadata violates constraint: is_time_two_zoom must be one of 0|1')
        WHERE NOT(NEW.is_times_two_zoom IN (0,1));
    END
```

**Table 2.2** - EXAMPLE: `tile_table_metadata` Insert Statement

```SQL
INSERT INTO tile_table_metadata VALUES ("sample_matrix_tiles", 1);
```

-
### 3.0 tile_matrix_metadata SQL

**Table 3.1** - `tile_matrix_metadata` Trigger Definition SQL

```SQL
CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_matrix_metadata_zoom_level_insert'
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'tile_matrix_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''tile_matrix_metadata'' violates constraint: zoom_level cannot be less than 0')
        WHERE (NEW.zoom_level < 0);
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_matrix_metadata_zoom_level_update'
  BEFORE UPDATE of zoom_level ON 'tile_matrix_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''tile_matrix_metadata'' violates constraint: zoom_level cannot be less than 0')
        WHERE (NEW.zoom_level < 0);
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_matrix_metadata_matrix_width_insert'
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'tile_matrix_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''tile_matrix_metadata'' violates constraint: matrix_width cannot be less than 1')
        WHERE (NEW.matrix_width < 1);
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_matrix_metadata_matrix_width_update'
  BEFORE UPDATE OF matrix_width ON 'tile_matrix_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''tile_matrix_metadata'' violates constraint: matrix_width cannot be less than 1')
        WHERE (NEW.matrix_width < 1);
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_matrix_metadata_matrix_height_insert'
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'tile_matrix_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''tile_matrix_metadata'' violates constraint: matrix_height cannot be less than 1')
        WHERE (NEW.matrix_height < 1);
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_matrix_metadata_matrix_height_update'
  BEFORE UPDATE OF matrix_height ON 'tile_matrix_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''tile_matrix_metadata'' violates constraint: matrix_height cannot be less than 1')
        WHERE (NEW.matrix_height < 1);
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_matrix_metadata_pixel_x_size_insert'
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'tile_matrix_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''tile_matrix_metadata'' violates constraint: pixel_x_size must be greater than 0')
        WHERE NOT (NEW.pixel_x_size > 0);
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_matrix_metadata_pixel_x_size_update'
  BEFORE UPDATE OF pixel_x_size ON 'tile_matrix_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''tile_matrix_metadata'' violates constraint: pixel_x_size must be greater than 0')
        WHERE NOT (NEW.pixel_x_size > 0);
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_matrix_metadata_pixel_y_size_insert'
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'tile_matrix_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''tile_matrix_metadata'' violates constraint: pixel_y_size must be greater than 0')
        WHERE NOT (NEW.pixel_y_size > 0);
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'tile_matrix_metadata_pixel_y_size_update'
  BEFORE UPDATE OF pixel_y_size ON 'tile_matrix_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''tile_matrix_metadata'' violates constraint: pixel_y_size must be greater than 0')
        WHERE NOT (NEW.pixel_y_size > 0);
    END
```

**Table 3.2** - EXAMPLE: `tile_matrix_metadata` Insert Statement

```SQL
INSERT INTO tile_matrix_metadata VALUES ("sample_matrix_tiles", 0, 1, 1, 512, 512, 2.0, 2.0)
```

-
### 4.0 sample_matrix_tiles SQL

**Table 4.1** – EXAMPLE: `sample_matrix_tiles` Trigger Definition SQL

```SQL
SELECT add_tile_triggers(‘sample_matrix_tiles’)
/* creates the following triggers */

CREATE TRIGGER "sample_matrix_tiles_zoom_insert"
  BEFORE INSERT ON "sample_matrix_tiles"
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''sample_matrix_tiles'' violates constraint: zoom_level not specified for table in tile_matrix_metadata')
        WHERE NOT (NEW.zoom_level IN (SELECT zoom_level FROM tile_matrix_metadata WHERE t_table_name = 'sample_matrix_tiles')) ;
    END

CREATE TRIGGER "sample_matrix_tiles_zoom_update"
  BEFORE UPDATE OF zoom_level ON "sample_matrix_tiles"
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''sample_matrix_tiles'' violates constraint: zoom_level not specified for table in tile_matrix_metadata')
        WHERE NOT (NEW.zoom_level IN (SELECT zoom_level FROM tile_matrix_metadata WHERE t_table_name = 'sample_matrix_tiles')) ;
    END

CREATE TRIGGER "sample_matrix_tiles_tile_column_insert"
  BEFORE INSERT ON "sample_matrix_tiles"
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''sample_matrix_tiles'' violates constraint: tile_column cannot be < 0')
        WHERE (NEW.tile_column < 0) ;
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''sample_matrix_tiles'' violates constraint: tile_column must by < matrix_width specified for table and zoom level in tile_matrix_metadata')
        WHERE NOT (NEW.tile_column < (SELECT matrix_width FROM tile_matrix_metadata WHERE t_table_name = 'sample_matrix_tiles' AND zoom_level = NEW.zoom_level));
    END

CREATE TRIGGER "sample_matrix_tiles_tile_column_update"
  BEFORE UPDATE OF tile_column ON "sample_matrix_tiles"
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''sample_matrix_tiles'' violates constraint: tile_column cannot be < 0')
        WHERE (NEW.tile_column < 0) ;
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''sample_matrix_tiles'' violates constraint: tile_column must by < matrix_width specified for table and zoom level in tile_matrix_metadata')
        WHERE NOT (NEW.tile_column < (SELECT matrix_width FROM tile_matrix_metadata WHERE t_table_name = 'sample_matrix_tiles' AND zoom_level = NEW.zoom_level));
    END

CREATE TRIGGER "sample_matrix_tiles_tile_row_insert"
  BEFORE INSERT ON "sample_matrix_tiles"
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''sample_matrix_tiles'' violates constraint: tile_row cannot be < 0')
        WHERE (NEW.tile_row < 0) ;
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''sample_matrix_tiles'' violates constraint: tile_row must by < matrix_height specified for table and zoom level in tile_matrix_metadata')
        WHERE NOT (NEW.tile_row < (SELECT matrix_height FROM tile_matrix_metadata WHERE t_table_name = 'sample_matrix_tiles' AND zoom_level = NEW.zoom_level));
    END

CREATE TRIGGER "sample_matrix_tiles_tile_row_update"
  BEFORE UPDATE OF tile_row ON "sample_matrix_tiles"
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''sample_matrix_tiles'' violates constraint: tile_row cannot be < 0')
        WHERE (NEW.tile_row < 0) ;
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''sample_matrix_tiles'' violates constraint: tile_row must by < matrix_height specified for table and zoom level in tile_matrix_metadata')
        WHERE NOT (NEW.tile_row < (SELECT matrix_height FROM tile_matrix_metadata WHERE t_table_name = 'sample_matrix_tiles' AND zoom_level = NEW.zoom_level));
    END
```
 
**Table 4.2** - EXAMPLE:  `sample_matrix_tiles` Insert Statement

```SQL
INSERT INTO sample_matrix_tiles VALUES (1, 1, 1, 1, "BLOB VALUE")
```
-
### 5.0 sample_rasters SQL

**Table 5.1** - EXAMPLE: `sample_rasters` Insert Statement

```SQL
INSERT INTO sample_rasters VALUES (1, {Elevation Raster}, 'rough terrain', {Area Photo} )
```

-
### 6.0 {RasterLayerName}_rt_metadata SQL

**Table 6.1** - EXAMPLE: `{RasterLayerName}_rt_metadata` Trigger Definition SQL

```SQL
SELECT add_rt_metadata_triggers('sample_rasters')
/* creates the following triggers */

CREATE TRIGGER 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata_r_raster_column_insert'
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''sample_rasters_rt_metadata'' violates constraint: r_raster_column must be specified for table sample_rasters in table raster_columns')
        WHERE (NOT (NEW.r_raster_column IN (SELECT DISTINCT r_raster_column FROM raster_columns WHERE r_table_name = 'sample_rasters')));
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata_r_raster_column_update'
  BEFORE UPDATE OF r_raster_column ON 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''sample_rasters_rt_metadata'' violates constraint: r_raster_column must be specified for table sample_rasters in table raster_columns')
        WHERE (NOT (NEW.r_raster_column IN (SELECT DISTINCT r_raster_column FROM raster_columns WHERE r_table_name = 'sample_rasters')));
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata_georectification_insert'
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''sample_rasters_rt_metadata'' violates constraint: georectification must be -1, 0, 1 or 2')
        WHERE (NOT (NEW.georectification IN (-1, 0, 1, 2)));
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata_georectification_update'
  BEFORE UPDATE OF georectification ON 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''sample_rasters_rt_metadata'' violates constraint: georectification must be -1, 0, 1 or 2')
        WHERE (NOT (NEW.georectification IN (-1, 0, 1, 2)));
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata_compr_qual_factor_insert' 
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''sample_rasters_rt_metadata'' violates constraint: compr_qual_factor < -1, must -1 or be between 1 and 100')
        WHERE NEW.compr_qual_factor < -1;
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''sample_rasters_rt_metadata'' violates constraint: compr_qual_factor = 0, must -1 or be between 1 and 100')
        WHERE NEW.compr_qual_factor = 0;
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table ''sample_rasters_rt_metadata'' violates constraint: compr_qual_factor > 100, must be -1 or between 1 and 100')
        WHERE NEW.compr_qual_factor > 100;
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata_compr_qual_factor_update' 
  BEFORE UPDATE OF compr_qual_factor ON 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''sample_rasters_rt_metadata'' violates constraint: compr_qual_factor < -1, must be -1 or between 1 and 100')
        WHERE NEW.compr_qual_factor < -1;
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''sample_rasters_rt_metadata'' violates constraint: compr_qual_factor = 0, must be -1 or between 1 and 100')
        WHERE NEW.compr_qual_factor = 0;
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table ''sample_rasters_rt_metadata'' violates constraint: compr_qual_factor > 100, must be -1 or between 1 and 100')
        WHERE NEW.compr_qual_factor > 100;
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata_row_id_value_insert' 
  BEFORE INSERT ON 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'insert on table sample_rasters_rt_metadata violates constraint: row_id_value must exist in sample_rasters table')
        WHERE NOT EXISTS (SELECT rowid FROM 'sample_rasters' WHERE rowid = NEW.row_id_value);
    END

CREATE TRIGGER 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata_row_id_value_update' 
  BEFORE UPDATE OF 'row_id_value' ON 'sample_rasters_rt_metadata'
    FOR EACH ROW
    BEGIN
      SELECT RAISE(ROLLBACK, 'update on table sample_rasters_rt_metadata violates constraint: row_id_value must exist in sample_rasters table')
        WHERE NOT EXISTS (SELECT rowid FROM 'sample_rasters' WHERE rowid = NEW.row_id_value);
    END
```

**Table 6.3** - EXAMPLE: `{RasterLayerName}_rt_metadata` Insert Statement

```SQL
INSERT INTO sample_matrix_tiles_rt_metadata VALUES (1, "tile_data", 1, -77.0, 38.0, -75.0, 40.0, 100,)
```
